 

Current research:

As a Postdoctoral fellow in the Roberts lab, I study how the environment impacts marine animals at the physiological and molecular systems level. I am particularly interested in how human-influenced environmental change is affecting species important to U.S. fisheries. I conduct experiments that simulate various ocean conditions and use omics technologies (like epigenomics, proteomics, and metabolomics) to measure animal response. Omics technologies give much greater resolution than past technologies with the capability to simultaneously survey thousands of molecular responses within one sample. However, this comes at the cost of handling large datasets, interpreting the signal above the noise, and understanding the biological significance of the signal. To manage large datasets, I establish and optimize existing data management protocols (accessible on the Roberts lab’s GitHub page https://github.com/RobertsLab/resources/wiki). To interpret signal above noise in these large datasets, I develop and implement bioinformatics pipelines that apply normalizations and different statistical methods. To understand the biological significance of the signal, I develop and implement various biological pathway analyses. I use an open access online lab notebook (https://shellywanamaker.github.io/) and GitHub (https://github.com/shellywanamaker) to publicly share my analyses and support reproducibility.

My research addresses the overarching aim of understanding how the environment influences organismal molecular systems, identifying collective responses that could be predictive of species tolerance for environmental change. I aim for my research to contribute to informing policy in both aquaculture industries and conservation, and towards this I collaborate with commercial and tribal shellfish hatcheries and NOAA's Northwest Fisheries Science Center Conservation Biology-Genetics division. Another major goal of my research is to contribute to education around how climate change may impact certain animals, and towards this I actively participate in outreach and curriculum development. 


Background:

I am a West Coast transplant, originally from Boston, MA. In Boston, I earned a B.S. in Biochemistry from Simmons College (now University). I worked as a research technician in the Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB) at Dana Farber Cancer Institute where I became fascinated with interactomes (large protein interaction maps), big data, and how network biology brings resolution to genotype-to-phenotype relationships. Craving a deeper understanding and a break from Boston winters, I joined Joe Ecker's Genomic Analysis Lab at the Salk Institute in San Diego in 2011 as a Research Assistant to work on developing a new assay for mapping protein interactions. With the promise of the assay being eventually applied to  non-model organisms for understanding how cellular networks vary across cell types and give rise to a particular phenotype, I was inspired to pursue graduate studies across the road at UC San Diego. I began the Biolgical Sciences Ph.D. program in 2013, part of the cell, molecular, and genetics biology track, where I continued my research in Joe Ecker's lab now focused on understanding protein interactions that directly contribute to gene regulation in __Arabidopsis thaliana__. Towards the end of my program, I became interested in how systems biology could be used in applied research, and received a year-long NSF Graduate Research Internship at NOAA's Northwest Fishery Science Center using omics to investigate how physiology and genetics in marine vertebrates are affected by ocean acidification. I returned to San Diego in the summer of 2018, completed my dissertation "High resolution molecular networks from novel 'omics' approaches elucidate survival strategies in organisms from land to sea" and received my Ph.D. in Biology. Shortly after, in the Fall of 2018, I began my Postdoctoral research in Steven Roberts' lab in the School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences at University of Washington. 